Code and Data for paper 
======================

This is the repository for the paper "Quantifying the rate and amplitude of cultural change in populations of AI agents "


# Project Overview

The roject contains scripts, prompts, and results related to Large Language Model exploration using Cultural Evolution model. The repository is split in three main component: `run-chain-llms` (python code to run the chain and interact wiht LLMs), `chain-output/` the data generated by the chain and `scripts-analysis/`, that include a theoretical model of cultural evolution and the script to run  abc.

## Structure

The project is divided into three parts:

1. **`run-chain-llms/`**: Code and tools needed to run the chains.
2. **`chain-output/`**: The raw and processed results of the chains.
3. **`scripts-analysis/`**: Various scripts for statistical modeling (ABC) and text/content analysis.

---

### The chains (`./run-chain-llms/`)

This directory contains the source code, environment configuration, and prompts required to execute the transmission chains.

* `gptCultEv.py`: main script  for running the transmission chain simulations.
* `extract_all.py` / `toCSV.py`: Scripts to parse raw logs into usable data formats.

* **Configuration:**
* `Dockerfile`: to easily run the chainDefines the environment build 
* `prompts/`: original prompts instructions given to the LLMs (e.g., `select_attractive.prompt`, `generatenew_efficient_health.prompt`).
* `new_mutation_prompts/`: new set of prompt



### Ouput (`./chain-output/`)

- **`full-chains/` (Raw Data)**:
  +  Organized by **LLM Model** (e.g., `GPT3.5`, `GPT4`, `Mistral-7B`, `Qwen2.5`).
  +  Inside each model folder, distinct experiments are named using a parameter convention: that store the output of one chaine combining one mutation and one selection operatore

-  **Experiment output:** Inside each experiment folder are the artifacts: `alltstepbeta.pkl` (Python pickle data), `processed_statements.csv`, and execution logs.


- **`merged-csvs/` (Aggregated Data)**:
  + Contains CSVs combining results across experiments (e.g., `GPT3.5_gennew_concatenated_files.csv`) to facilitate easier analysis without reading thousands of individual files.

* **`word-frequencies/`**:



### Analysis (`./scripts-analysis/`)

This section is split in three main folder: `abc/`, `text_analysis` and `figures_papers`

* **`text_analysis/`**:
   Scripts for linguistic analysis (`basic_metrics_auto.R`).
  +  **`dictionaries/`**: Contains LIWC dictionaries and lists of pronouns/anxiety words used to score the text generated by the models.
  + **`output/`**: PDF plots and CSVs resulting from the text analysis.


* **`abc/` (Approximate Bayesian Computation)**:
 +  Contains R scripts (`abcrfa.R`, `model-core.R`) to run ABC to fit model core to the output of the chains


* **`var/`**:
  + Plotting and utility scripts used by all the other part (`plot3D_points.R`, `checkingCounts.R`).


---

The following part explain more in details how to run the different aspect of the project:

# Chain transmission with OPEN AI models


## Using the docker:

A dockerfile is provided to run the expeiremnt, which allow to easily re-run it regardless of the hardware or software you have.

First of all you will need to install docker : https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/

On linux, don't forget to add yourself to the docker group if you don'twant to have to use sudo to run it

```bash
   sudo groupadd docker
   sudo usermod -aG docker $USER
```

### Build and run the docker

To build the docker

```bash
cd chain-llms/
docker build -t llmchain .
```

And to run it you will need your OPENAIA KEY 

You can pass it using --env option from dockers, but many other option are possible. Thus to show the help of the docker::

```bash
docker run --rm  --env OPENAI_API_KEY=$OPENAI_API_KEY llmchain --help
```

A full command to run one chain with specific selection and mutation operator will look like that:

```bash
docker run --rm  -v ./results:/usr/src/app/results --env OPENAI_API_KEY=$OPENAI_API_KEY llmchain -N 20 -t 10 -k 5 --statements statements.txt --modprompt prompts/generatenew_random_health.prompt --selprompt prompts/select_random.prompt --outdir "results/"
```

Where is -v is used to link the output folder within the docker with a local folder

## Using python virtual environment

This has been lastly tested with Python 3.13.5. If you have a different version, the package listed in requirement.tx may need to be adjust. We suggest you to install the same version of python using pyenv.

Once done and to run the code:

```bash
export OPENAI_API_KEY="key"
```

This use the python virtual env:

```bash
python3 -m venv .
source ./bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
python3 gptCultEv.py -N 20 -t 10 -k 5 --statements statements.txt --modprompt prompts/generatenew_random_health.prompt --selprompt prompts/select_random.prompt --outdir "results/"
```

Once the experiment is done two files are create: `alltstepbeta.pkl` & `variantsbeta.pkl`
They store informaiton about the variants seleted through time and the satetment generated. They can be exctracted using:

```bash
python3 get_top_ten.py  --outdir results 
python3 toCSV.py --outdir results > results.csv 
python3 extract_all.py --outdir results 
```
- `get_top_ten.py` prints the 10 most used statements at the end of the simulation
- `toCSV.py` creates a csv with how many  agents have choose each traits ; one row per time step and one column per statement 
- `extract_all.py` also write a csv but with the full  statements along with their counts per time step.


Two bash scripts wrappers are available to automatize the exploration of different selection vs mutation prompt and are provided in the folder
- `lastautoExplor.sh`
- `process_simulation.sh`

You will need to start with the first, that will automatically combine the type of prompt need

```bash
bash lastautoExplor.sh
```

And then extract the result using:

```bash
bash process_simulation.sh
```

This second step will automtically extract the data from the pickled object and concate

# Chain transmission with other models:


## llamacpp 
To run the chain transmission with other models we used [llamacpp](https://llama-cpp.com/) to run open source model locally. 

Following the isntruction  [here](https://llama-cpp.com/download/)  to download llama-cpp, you can then automatically run model from hugging face (not that you will need an API key from hugging face)

With ubuntun, it is enough to download pre-build release from https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp/

```bash
wget https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp/releases/download/b6697/llama-b6697-bin-ubuntu-x64.zip
./bin/llama-server -hf MaziyarPanahi/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1-GGUF -hft ${HF_TOKEN} 
```

where `${HF_TOKEN}` is Hugging Face token to download the model


## Adjust `gptCultEv.py`
In `gptCultEv.py`, replace open AI client by localhost server:

```python
#replace this:
client = OpenAI(api_key=os.getenv('OPENAI_API_KEY'))

# By this:
client = OpenAI(
    base_url="http://localhost:8080/v1",  # "http://<Your api-server IP>:port"
    api_key="sk-no-key-required"
)
```

Adjust the chat completion to the model used.
 
```python
#replace this:
 def chat_with_gpt(prompt):
  response = client.chat.completions.create(model="gpt-3.5-turbo",
  messages=[
    {"role": "user", "content": prompt}
  ])
```

This will depend on the model you use, for Mistral 7B this should become something like :

```python
  response = client.chat.completions.create(
          model="MaziyarPanahi/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3-GGUF",
          messages=[ {"role": "user", "content": "[INST]"+prompt+"[//INST]"} ],
          max_tokens=50)
```

Here is full setup for Qwen3-8B :


```python
#custom endpoints and model 
# (note in this case with Qwen3-8B you need to deal we the thinking output of the model)
def chat_with_gpt(prompt):
  # When using custom LLM via llamacpp
  client = OpenAI(
            base_url="http://localhost:8080/v1",  #replace with other adress if run on different server 
            api_key="sk-no-key-required"
            )
  request_seed=random.randint(1,10000000000) 
  response = client.chat.completions.create(
          model="Qwen/Qwen3-8B-GGUF",
          messages=[ {"role": "user", "content": prompt+" /nothink"} ],
          seed=request_seed,
          max_tokens=50
          )
  answer = re.sub(r'<think>.*?</think>', '', answer, flags=re.DOTALL).strip() 
### Below the normal openAI version:
  #client = OpenAI( api_key=os.getenv('OPENAI_API_KEY'))
  #request_seed=random.randint(1,10000000000) 
  #response = client.chat.completions.create(
  #        model="gpt-3.5-turbo",
  #        messages=[ {"role": "user", "content": prompt+""} ],
  #        seed=request_seed,
  #        max_tokens=50
  #        )
  #      
  answer = response.choices[0].message.content
```

# Approximate Bayesian Computation
This part is stored in `script-analysis/abc` and is mainly written in R

## Model of Cultural Transmission


The theoreticla model used to try to epxlain the chains is  inspired by: https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/full/10.1098/rsif.2022.0570 and others
Model
To run it on its own:


```R
source(here::here("scripts-analysis/abc/R/model-slots.R"))
source(here::here("scripts-analysis/var/heatmap.R"))

m=10
tstep=100
N=500
p0=rep(N/m,m)
u0="rnorm"
mu=.01
res=model.slot(p0=p0,J=.5,u0=u0,beta=.5,sde=1,tstep=tstep,mu=mu,N=N,m=m,mutate=T,log=F,K=50,useslots=T)
heatmap_utility(res)
```

The model here is only used during the abc.

## ABC rejection + Random Forest

This whole ABC is done in one single script that assume  that the chain resuls are load from the concatenated CSV.

The script use to do so is `scripts-analysis/abc/abc_paper_small.R`

This script performs Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC) with Random Forest Adjustment (ABCRFA) to infer model parameters based on simulation metrics. The script leverages multiple R scripts and external CSV files to carry out the analysis. It allows for the reuse of pre-saved simulation priors or the generation of new priors if needed.

### Requirements

- R packages: `parallel`, `here`, `hdrcde`.

### Input

- Two command line arguments are required:
  1. `outdir`: Directory where the output of ABC will be saved.
  2. `experiment`: Directory where the `concatenated_files.csv` are stored.

### Script Details

1. **Setup and Initialization**:
    - Read command-line arguments to determine output directory and experiment data location.
    - Source necessary R scripts.
    - Set seed for reproducibility.
    - Initialize ABC simulation parameters including number of simulations, tolerance, and others.

2. **Loading or Creating Priors**:
    - If `loadsimu` is TRUE, attempt to load the prior from `prior.RDS`. If the file doesn't exist, halt execution.
    - If `loadsimu` is FALSE, generate new prior values and save them as `prior.RDS`.

3. **Metrics Calculation**:
    - Define the metrics used for measuring distances between simulated and experimental data.

4. **Main Execution Loop**:
    - For each model variant and experiment type, load the experiment files.
    - Execute simulations and compute metrics using parallel processing.
    - Calculate distances between simulated and experimental scenarios.

5. **Save Results**:
    - Save all simulation distances and results in the specified `outdir`.

6. **Error Handling**:
    - The script includes error handling to manage missing files and simulation errors (ie parameters that yield weird simulation etc...)

### Output

- The script generates multiple `.RDS` files containing:
  - Prior configurations, augmented as needed.
  - Simulation results and computed metrics.
  - ABC-RFA models and posterior distributions.

